---
title: "JavaScript..."
date: "2022-03-22"
layout: "post"
categories:
    - javascript
---

<style jsx>{`
    a {
        text-decoration: underline;
        text-decoration-color: #ff7276;
    }
`}</style>

As a developer, I truly believe in the importance of achieving higher
abstraction on many of the concepts we learn and having a good mental model on
the why and how. Therefore, I try to aim at improving my understanding and what
better way to do so by explaining, whether talking to others or like I would
rather try to do, which is writing.

First of all, is important to highlights the three components that build
websites and apps which are: Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), Cascading Style
Sheets (CSS), and JavaScript. Each one has a role in creating a web app

-   **HTML** is a markup language that creates the skeleton of the web page. All
    the paragraphs, sections, images, headings, and text are written in HTML.
    The content appears on the website in the order they are written in HTML.
-   **CSS** controls the style and the additional aspects of the layout. CSS is
    used to create the design of the website creating the colors, fonts.
    columns, borders, etc. It takes the website from plain text elements to
    colorful designs.
-   The third element is **JavaScript.** HTML and CSS create the structure, but
    they don’t do anything from there. JavaScript creates dynamic activity on
    your app. And, is what controls functions when buttons are clicked, how
    password forms are authenticated, how media is controlled.

## **So, What is JavaScript?**

Basically, JavaScript is a single-threaded and single concurrent programming
language which means it can handle one task at a time. It’s a scripting language
for the web. And, It is an interpreted language, which means it does not need a
compiler to translate its code like other programming languages like C or C++.

JavaScript controls the dynamic elements of web pages. It works in web browsers
and, more recently on web servers as well. Meaning that the server works in much
the same way, waiting in a loop for a network request, and accepting more
incoming requests while the first one is being handled.

## **How does it work?**

JavaScript is what is known as a client-side script. Most web apps, such as a
search engine, work because of an interaction between the user device (e.g.
computer, phone, or tablet) and a remote server. The software on the remote
server sends information to the client (i.e. the user’s machine) and the
software on the client-side reads the information and renders a Web page on the
screen.

A client-side script is a programming language that performs its tasks entirely
on the client’s machine and does not need to interact with the server to
function. For instance, if you have a webpage loaded on your computer and your
internet service provider goes down you’re still able to interact with the web
pages already loaded on your browser. You will now, however, be able to navigate
to new web pages or access any data located remotely.

JavaScript is asynchronous by nature, meaning it is designed to ensure
non-blocking code execution. Non-blocking code do not prevent the execution of
another piece of code. Meaning that it is able to communicate with the server in
the background without interrupting the user interaction taking place in the
foreground

For example. Today, search engines almost all have an autocomplete function. The
user begins typing a word into the search box and a list of suggestions appears
below. The experience is seamless. The suggestions appear without reloading the
page.

In the background, as the user types the letters in the search box, JavaScript
reads and sends them to a remote server and the server sends suggestions back

![The software on the server-side analyzes the words and runs algorithms to anticipate the user's search term. Such programs are diabolically large and complex. But the JavaScript on the client-side is as simple and small as possible to ensure fast interactions for the user.](https://i.imgur.com/gQi11xY.gif)

The software on the server-side analyzes the words and runs algorithms to
anticipate the user's search term. Such programs are diabolically large and
complex. But the JavaScript on the client-side is as simple and small as
possible to ensure fast interactions for the user.

## **JavaScript on the browser**

JavaScript script happens on the browser, which in reality is quite a
complicated piece of software with a large number of lines of code. Two of the
most important parts of it are the JavaScript engine and the rendering engine.

In Google Chrome,
[Blink](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1boPxbgNrTU0ddsc144rcXayGA_WF53k96imRH8Mp34Y/edit#slide=id.g60f92a5151_40_0) is
the rendering engine that is responsible for the whole rendering pipeline
including DOM trees, styles, events, and V8 integration. It parses the DOM tree,
resolves styles, and determines the visual geometry of all the elements. While
continually monitoring dynamic changes via animation frames, Blink paints the
content on your screen.

And, the JavaScript in chrome is the V8 engine. It is used inside Chrome and
Node.js. It is in charge of executing the JavaScript code.

The JavaScript engine translates source code into machine code that allows a
computer to perform specific tasks at the hardware level. It is composed of
a `call stack` and a `memory heap`. A `call stack` is where our code is actually
executed, using `execution context`. A `heap` is an unstructured memory pool
that stores all the objects that our application needs.

I will recommend reading
**[The Google Chrome Comic](https://www.google.com/googlebooks/chrome/)** for
more information about the browser.

All of this is still just the basics of how the JavaScript scripting language
really works, there is still a lot to cover, things like how the call stack and
the memory heap work, these are really interesting topics in my opinion because
it’s really collaborate to the higher level of understanding of the JavaScript
language and I find it really fun to have these ideas whenever I’m writing new
code.

Further reading:

-   [In the Loop](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cCOL7MC4Pl0)
-   [What the hack is the event loop anyway?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8aGhZQkoFbQ)
